they have rampaged across cities and
villages killing innocent unarmed
civilians the bearded man demands his
prisoners repeat Islamic state here to
stay they target Muslims and religious
minorities murdering them when they can
we are an Islamic bomb that a bunch of
psychopaths paraded on a beach in orange
jumpsuits before being murdered it's
their typical combination of Hollywood
production quality and just gratuitous
violence all of us are fighting
extremism all over the world Isis is not
with testa sizing the fall of Mosul was
a political failure and a military
failure it was a godsend for us their
ambition to commit genocide against an
ancient people
we must not be so frozen with fear Isis
and Hamas are branches of the same
poisonous tree ISIL speaks for no
religion we will follow them to the
gates of hell the situation today is
what bin Laden could have only dreamed
of
because
will reside
[Music]
: power with a speech to the UN in 2003
as justification for the coalition going
in to Iraq the American came into the
country without knowing the nature of
this country there were catastrophic
strategic mistakes made after Baghdad
fell on April 9th could ISIL have done
so well without the Baathists on their
side Isis successfully taps into several
narratives all other than a plate of
victimhood the victim narrative plays to
we lost Saddam Hussein that is when this
problem from Hell began
when the Americans landed in arc late
March 2003 and overthrew a system it
wasn't just an issue of regime change
they overturned a decades or even a
centuries old system of power privilege
and patronage
[Music]
in 2003 and after the overthrow of
Saddam Hussein we have had a rosy dream
of building a new prosperous stable
secure united Iraq built on our 5000
years of civilization history
unfortunately that was all shattered in
the Battle of Iraq the United States and
our allies have prevailed
not SWAT teams and Saddam Husein the
term especially in zakat intended that
war victory Rahila soul and alpha really
mikuni alone hakuna mouth
the us-led invasion of Iraq took just
six weeks to bring saddam hussein's
24-year rule to an iconic end other
nations in history have fought in
foreign lands and remained to occupy and
exploit Americans following a battle
want nothing more than to return home it
would be another eight years before US
troops would leave Iraq the country was
run by one person Saddam Hussein then
you remove that person and not attending
to the country for more than hundred
days at a month to be gross negligence
by the American administration then with
the country shown of its leader and its
government or it began as an invasion
soon turned into an occupation
and short it was chaotic a lot of the
chaos that a cradle was not anticipated
aly Kaduri was special advisor to the
Coalition Provisional Authority the US
dominated body tasked with governing an
increasingly violent Iraq despite what
we were being told by various agencies
and by the military it was very clear to
me in the summer of 2003 in the fall
particularly that there was an
insurgency that it was gearing up the
violence numbers were increasing the
casualties were increasing and frankly
just because I spoke the language
I heard daily that there were rising
attacks at that point there was the
responsiveness was mainly denial
particularly there was a sense perhaps
of arrogance that through the size and
scope of the US forces there but who
would care to raise arms against
government minister Ali Alawi work to
restore order during the early years of
Iraq's occupation along with National
Security Adviser more fuck our boy I
remember Jerry Bremer came to see me and
said Martha what is happening who is
shooting data at us who is killing
Americans and it was a very simple
phenomena to analyze that the Baathist
have started to rebel and to come and
also some of the jihadists so that
amalgamation of Baathists salafists
that's a new strange creature if you
like as head of the Coalition
Provisional Authority Paul Gerry
Bremer's first official order was to ban
the deposed Baath Party in all forms it
was a decision that both the Americans
and Iraqis would come to regret
defending me of the army and setting up
the de-baathification commissioner which
became a tool of political vengeance now
chelebi's hands we never recovered from
those things because hundreds of
thousands of people became unemployed
disillusioned disenfranchised and took
to insurgency the concept the central
concept of de-baathification was right
to D bath defies like to Indian ossify
this is this is from the default off'
occasion as originated from
denazification because this is a fascist
neutral sectarian dictatorship by arab
our social party now 2d bath eyes the
ideology not the individuals so but when
you come and implement the law it was
implemented with a political for
political set settling scores the
Americans aware that that was being
being done in their name really yes
absolutely
many of us were aware that that was
happening warned against it lobbied the
White House and others to stop this
because we what we did not want it to
become was a sectarian witch-hunt but
many other politicians be hijacked to
the modification Commission and
leveraged it for political or personal
or financial reasons including extortion
and blackmail and it be it directly fed
into the the popularity and the rise of
the insurgency which directly fed into
because of the disenfranchisement in the
solution everybody talked about
financial al-qaeda's totally this is
partly has contributed to the insurgency
I can't I don't know whether this is the
main reason I think the main reason that
a minority community has lost the
political power economic interest social
status and they resorted to violence to
regain this power when I ask you Martin
the the end result of de-baathification
was the Baathists decided to meet up
with the Salafist what do we know about
the individuals what do we know about
the Baathists that did decide to
you know jump into this group and form
this alliance you know what sort of
background have we heard about a core
group of former officers senior officers
colonel level and above in Saddam
Hussein's military did form an alliance
of convenience with the Salafist
jihadists who it must be said before the
war were archenemies Saddam's regime did
not trust organized political Islam at
all let alone the jihadist current but
by the time they got together there was
a powerful organizing print support that
the Baathists could bring to the table
but I just wanted to add just one thing
to what dr. Abadi was saying all of
these things about the Sunnis who were
the majority of the bath is losing
losing power losing social social status
all of that's true as is the total lack
of a reconciliation re empowering them
back into the communities but one simple
simple point that keeps coming back in
every discussion I had was not just so
much a stripping of status but a
stripping of personal dignity and
personal dignity is a key driver of
human behavior in the Arab world when
that's taken away from you as it was to
many of these people we we have seen you
know reactions such as this which have
helped form this catastrophic current
that we have now and it should never be
diminished I mean that was very very
important to a lot of the motivations
please don't get me wrong Martin what I
am saying and I have to admit that there
are there are hundreds of strategic
tactical and operational mistakes in
security in economy and in politics and
services where it's been committed over
the last 12 years by the Americans by
the Iraqis by Aboy the regional players
so their mistakes have been has been
committed there is no doubt about it but
they think the the the very interesting
question is this holy well unholy
alliance between Barth ISM and I would
say were have ISM
two disaffected constituencies who had
been mortal enemies for many years had
finally decided that they had some
common ground and it was you know just a
variation on the ancient mantra of my
enemy's enemy is my friend they are
lined what was supposed to be a
temporary alliance to try to get and
believe in exhaust United States or its
so-called puppets and Baghdad the
improvised nature of Sunni attacks now
combined with the Baathist know how the
insurgency moved to a new scale of
terror
the first major manifestation which was
the assassination of Martin Ibaka Hakeem
in a car bomb took thousands of dollars
it was a planned well executed highly
political act which showed that there
was something behind it it wasn't just a
one-off type of violence that it was
part of a program
the August 2003
Imam Ali mosque bombing in the Jeff was
aimed directly at Iraq's Shia hierarchy
but for the US Sony violence against
Shia targets was not the primary concern
the more serious element was not seen to
be the insurgency the Sydney basin
surgeon see with rather the various
uprisings associated with what the
sudden Mutara had started to organize
the Metis Army that made no no bones
about what they were fighting for and
that was to defend Shiar interests by
the spring of 2004 there were two
insurgencies there was the Sunni
insurgency in the central part of the
country but and then there was a sudden
she insurgency led by merciless other
literally radical Shia cleric also
explaining the opportunity really to try
to drag the u.s. into a quagmire to
exhaust it to humiliate it and to
ultimately get it to withdraw the US
invasion of Iraq had spawned two
insurgencies igniting an increasingly
sectarian conflict
no-one embraced the apocalyptic vision
of a Sunni Shia war more than the man
used to justify American aggression Iraq
today harbors deadly terrorist network
headed by Abu Musab al-zarqawi
an associate collaborator of Osama bin
Laden and his al Qaeda lieutenants they
were talking about Zarqawi as being this
potent force and he in fact wasn't the
force that he turned out to be a couple
of years later from his terrorist
network in Iraq Zarqawi can direct his
network in the Middle East and beyond
contrary to American claims that
jordanians Akari had no formal alignment
with al-qaeda or its leadership before
2003 a year later with coalition troops
in control of Iraq the once lone-wolf
jihadists had become the figurehead of
the Sunni insurgency his group of talk
about jihad acknowledge the leadership
of guidance our heavy and rebranded
itself as al-qaida in Mesopotamia and at
that point he became as it were the
poster boy of the insurgency and for a
while his antics and his extreme
violence began to cast as it were a
shadow all the other insurgent groups he
was trying to portray himself as a Rambo
of the Muslim world Delhi we
revolutionized the ideology of al Qaeda
see al Qaeda of sama bin Laden and
Zawahiri was built on anti Americanism
no sir Khali started to introduce the
sectarian element of which is an
teixeira element and once the sectarian
war erupted then you get a fair of
dysfunctional state and this is the best
environment the jihadist would work
Misaka we had started to organize them
started to instill a discipline and a
fervor and emerge as somebody who was
going to lead and NASA Mujahideen and
this pantomime villain this fervent
ideologue had really started to take
control of the of the post invasion
months in Iraq
a year after claiming Iraq had ties to
al-qaeda America's falsehood became a
self-fulfilling prophecy with Zachary
centerstage he became like Al Capone
you're public enemy number one it became
very very easy then to focus all
attention to being a very small but
extremely violent group was whose acts
are far far louder than and create a
much bigger bang than their reality the
Americans were very quick to pick up on
the threat from Zarqawi in in 2004 and
at that point if you recall we saw the
the first of the Western hostages in
orange jumpsuits who were paraded in
front of very grainy cameras and dark
rooms with terrifying men with knives
standing behind them
sarcone was in one of those videos a man
named Zarqawi is responsible for
planning car bombs and beheading
Americans swore allegiance to Osama bin
Laden our troops will defeat Zarqawi and
his likes overseas in Iraq so we do not
have to face them
the American presidents rallying words
failed to stop the beheading of u.s.
contractor Nick Berg all other masked
men involved in the killing could be
identified but the video of Berg's final
moments claims a car we as main
executioner the u.s. standard-issue
orange jumpsuit and a staged spectacle
of brutality would now become familiar
markers of a new phase in terror focused
around responsibility for many of the
beheadings and bombings in Iraq the
focus was on Zarqawi as an individual
and the way that the media works and the
way that the US wanted to portray the
insurgency was by limiting it to the
acts of Matt and saying terrorist who
has this bloodlust at the beginning of
2006 Abu Musab al-zarqawi is al Qaeda in
Iraq claimed responsibility for an act
that would tear the country apart
Zachary was successful in triggering the
sectarian war by bombing the two shrines
in Samara that combination of acts of
terrorism and lack of proper response
from the government which entered us
into two years of civil war I used to
collect more than 100 bodies called the
blooded Li culled from the street of
Baghdad every day and that was really
really depressing the bombings generated
a counter terror led by a large number
groups affiliated or associated with the
Shia munitions and connive that or to
some extent supported by elements in
Iraqi government so the destruction of
the zkan shrine and the entry into the
fray of the major Shia militias the war
in Iraq began to take the form of a kind
of civil war by April of 2006 al-qaeda
in Iraq was fighting both an insurgency
and a sectarian war leaving the country
awash with blood and emboldened Abu
Musab as a car we issued his first
public statement in a video morning
george w bush of greater violence
[Music]
one month later president bush's dream
of bringing democracy to Iraq was coming
true
Nouri al-maliki became Iraq's first
democratically elected prime minister
for many years Nouri al-maliki was a
relatively low-level member of the
dollar party who was involved in covert
operations to try to bring about the
overthrow of the Baath regime and many
people were tortured or rounded up and
and disappeared as a result of
associations with the war we are now the
Akuma Castle minute but Perry fidelity
and early on to our jihad jihad
difficult Authority Rishabha he was
involved in organizing acts of
resistance against the Baathist regime
out of a base in Syria he was not on
frankly on anyone's radar screen as
potential Prime Minister first he was in
charge of devaluation and then we
selected him to be Prime Minister in
2006 there was a lot of horse trading a
lot of jostling for for power and
influence
muqtada and others were looking to
advance their interests by swinging
their weight behind monarchy we were
warned by some of his political rivals
about his secretary anism at the time
but there are bad options and there are
worse options and there are really bad
options so what you have to do really is
try to calculate what you perceived to
be the least worst option and go with it
and frankly that was the case with
Maliki in 2006
Nuri al-maliki had come to power echoing
george w bush's warning to Abu Musab
al-zarqawi the new government was ready
to meet the challenge of defeating the
Sunni insurgents a month after Iraq's
first democratic elections azcar we was
killed in a US air strike by that point
he had ignited a full-blown sectarian
war Iraq was out of control there were
three to four thousand deaths per month
for the best part of nine months of that
year and the country looked completely
beyond any hope at all the Sunni
insurgency was raging there were a
number of leaders around the country who
could who could step up and take his
place and several in fact did
stepping up to fill the void at the top
of al-qaeda in Iraq was one of its
founders Abu Ayyub al-masri by October
2006 the group had merged with other
Sunni insurgents our mastery announced
the formation of a new entity the
Islamic State of Iraq and Abu Omar
al-baghdadi as it simia the fledgling
state would soon face a Sunni insurgency
'he's most critical challenge
[Music]
early in 2007 the insurgent group that
have been an offshoot of al Qaeda
central had evolved into the Islamic
State of Iraq it was a bullish move that
forced the American occupiers into a
dramatic shift America will change our
strategy to help the Iraqis carry out
their campaign to put down sectarian
violence and bring security to the
people of Baghdad
this will require increasing American
force levels so I've committed more than
20,000 additional American troops to
Iraq the insurgents that continued to
rage with no real blow towards momentum
until later that year when the awakening
actually started to take some sort of
hold in Anbar province the u.s.
successfully cut a wage as it were
between the extreme violence of the
mainly of iodine inspired insurgents and
the Sunni Arab tribal is taking
advantage of the indiscriminate use of
violence against its own the so called
awakening the Sawa that sauce Sunni
tribes unite against the newly announced
Islamic State of Iraq were supported by
a surge of US troops the goal was simple
wipe out the insurgency by January 2007
there was a strategic cooperation
between the tribes and Americans and
that was then used to to try and get on
the front foot for the first time in
several years at the same time as our
Kerry's replacement Abu Omar al-baghdadi
had stepped up and was starting to try
and assert his will across an insurgency
which for the which for the first time
was under some serious threat one of the
secrets of the surge was the US
government working with the Sunni tribes
across Anbar salahuddin they know and
yellow provinces to put them on the
payroll give them a means of earning a
living rather than throwing them you
know to the wolves with the bath days
and al Qaeda and when we put them on the
payroll nearly a hundred thousand of
them
we saw that that with our support and
our financing in our weapons they were
able to obliterate al-qaeda within a
span of really months it seemed like a
winning strategy but in a rapidly
failing state the line between Ally and
enemy was increasingly blurred we should
understand though I think some
legitimate reservations about some of
these groups they were in many cases
insurgent groups it took us a few years
to get past the fact that these
individuals had our blood on their hands
I want at least some of these guys were
the same guys that were already fighting
alongside al Qaeda in preceding years so
it's a very complicated situation where
we were a lying with essentially al
Qaeda affiliated groups to fight al
Qaeda on the pretext that they weren't
actually al Qaeda but they were only al
Qaeda affiliated and we were just
pouring money into this the combination
of US troops and Sunni tribes had beaten
back the Islamic State of Iraq but as
America's focus shifted to building ties
with local tribes the Maliki government
was breaking promises made to their
leaders General Petraeus and ambassador
Crocker went and went into Prime
Minister Maliki repeatedly and said okay
you know we have spent billions of
dollars supporting them but now their
Iraqi citizens they're helping you
maintain security and stability you need
to put them on your payroll he refused
dragged his feet for years and so when
al Qaeda or others came offering cash
they had no choice but but to what to
accept
[Music]
the us thought that the insurgency had
had died out relying on this to some
extent romanticized a tribal force
called an Sawa as being somehow the
guarantor of stability and security in
listen Europe areas people thought that
was the end of of Islamic state at least
that is what we were led to believe this
insurgency that had been kicked off in
2004 had had not been strategically
defeated it was a lull
they'd been scattered they'd been
disorganized that being disorientated
but they were able to overrun Iraqi
state security forces more or less at
will they maintained a potent a tactical
threat to US forces where they remained
in Iraq and it became clear that that
the steel that had been instilled into
the al-qaida group or the earliest
incarnation of what we now know as the
Islamic state remained but it would seem
to be a rapidly shrinking force many of
its leaders were branded some killed but
mainly apprehended and then incarcerated
in a camp in southern Europe called Camp
Bucca by the end of 2007 after the death
of almost 100,000 Iraqi civilians and
over 4,000 coalition troops the
prevailing narrative was of a fatally
weakened Islamic State of Iraq bailiffs
of policy and foresight that had dogged
the US occupation as supposedly being
overcome but at that same moment they
were being repeated at Camp Bucca what
can't Booker and other military
facilities that are being luxury
radicalization centers they were the
best environment the best school where
the jihad
were trained and taught can't book it
became an incubator for an insurgency
the joke among all the troops was if I
ever have to come back to Camp Bucca I
want it to be as a detainee built by the
Americans at the stance of the
occupation kombuchas first detainees
came from the notorious Abu Ghraib
prison Luka would make right everything
Abu Ghraib got wrong that at least was
the idea right there the whole ideology
behind Booga is there will not be
another Abu Ghraib on this commander
this task force this anybody's watch in
contrast to Abu Ghraib we had teachers
and some of the best health care ever
provided it was relatively comfortable
for an inter-facility in a warzone
certainly much more comfortable than in
the Iraqi facility or torture you know
and rape and other atrocities were
widespread the Americans by that point
had reached thinking that to who do we
trust here in this society
everybody says hates us we we came here
as liberators and now we're occupiers
how do we trust anyone here so we want
to get them all together we want to
sequentially vet them and decide who's
against us and who we could work with
that was the intention but the effect
was was something completely to the
opposite there were large numbers of
people who weren't against them in the
first place when they went into Booker
who were very much against them when
they were released the Americans cast a
wide net rounding up thousands of Iraqi
men young and old Sunni and Shiah a
catch-all attempt to establish security
and fire a shot across the bow of the
Islamic State of Iraq became instead a
shot in the arm
they regroup right under the noses of
their captors and they assess what went
wrong and they plotted their return back
into the field the cap was split in two
into two areas one for the Shia's and
one for the Sonny's but it was the
Sunnis who used this long period of
internment to instill some kind of an
ideological fever a battle readiness
into those who felt the indignity of
actually being taken there and and also
there were numerous leaders who were
committed to an ideological course who
did buy into the the preordained world
view that this was an existential fight
against a mortal foe when you maybe put
ten radicals together and said these
guys are all these are the worst of the
worst as it was aptly described it then
became a management seminar for upper
echelon of Isis those people mixed up
with these impressionable younger people
from the streets of Anbar in Baghdad and
were a potent mix Australian journalist
Martin Shilov met one high-ranking
member of the Islamic State of Iraq a
man with first-hand experience of Camp
Bucca one man who I've met was an inmate
at Camp Bucca I call him a prophet
before he got to book a shooting an
American text with with RPGs and along
the highway near Fallujah was was almost
an adventure he believed in it he
believed that a fight against occupation
was a just fight but in Booker he
started to buy into an ideology retired
US Army captain Mitchell gray was
stationed at Camp Bucca and witnessed
both the radicalization of detainees and
measures to counter jihadist ideology
the feeling-wise if you could have
legitimate religious experts come in and
give religious classes and talk to them
about you know the true meaning of the
coin and to show the some of the verses
that may be a radical islam is using to
justify violence that you know there's
another interpretation to that that this
will help them understand their own
religion better and will act as a
deterrent ambassador crocker and i
received briefings from general doug
stone who was in charge of tournament
operations and he warned us that they
believe that some of the prison
populations including in bucha
especially a book or being radicalized
and they were doing various things to
try to deer Attica lies the populations
but obviously that didn't take root or
didn't take good enough it showed how
impossible general stones tasks really
was because in the end no matter how he
sliced it and diced it there were going
to be problems and consequences however
that came up
we told them several times on records
this is going to be a real time bomb in
future and all of a sudden they were in
a hurry to release them and in few weeks
time they released more than 100,000
these people went back into their towns
and villages and in that period the
Islamic state which was written off as a
sub heartbeat insurgency group was
successfully regrouping but they were
never seen to be as being capable of
coming back as a formidable insurgency I
recall sitting with the American
ambassador Ryan Crocker at the time
receiving a series of lengthy briefings
from a marine two-star general Doug
Stone who was running detaining
operations for the coalition and general
stone was extremely sharp I think you
remember him dr. white and he knew we
knew that that the radicalization was
going on this is in the 2007/8 period
and we were trying to do various things
to stop it but frankly because Abu
Ghraib had been the center of torture
and rape under Saddam Hussein
and then because of the abuses that we
saw in 2004 that maximum security
facility was shut down and Bucca I think
from my recollection had about 30,000
prisoners there I believe somewhere
between 90 and 99 percent were Sunni so
what you ended up having was many were
guilty of various things or thought to
be guilty
many were swept up because again of the
civil war and and they were just swept
up sort of on suspicion but hadn't done
anything but what it ended up happening
was you had a witch's brew a toxic brew
of hardcore jihadis people who hadn't
done anything but they were there
nonetheless and were thus radicalized it
became the perfect incubator for
transnational jihad a few years later
the US was obviously forced to leave
Iraq and all of these individuals were
let go but if they had intelligence why
didn't they think this is not a clever
idea we're putting all these moderates
and more fundamentalists together and
they are basically radicalizing the more
moderate well again we knew about it and
and the cold the military was taking
steps to address it but what are you
going to do with 30 thousand people but
I mean you can't put all of them in
solitary confinement
you mentioned general stone the two
stars guy I wasn't I'm not sure that he
understood that time bomb called
Kombucha we could have known telling him
I kept on telling the American then this
is going to explode in our face and in
the very near future
look dr. Abadi we spent over 2000 days
together in the Green Zone he was
national security adviser I was special
assistant to five American ambassadors
let's be very honest with each other
the United States government deserves a
lot of blame for what happened in Iraq
but frankly Saudi Iraqis again we spent
over two point seven trillion dollars in
Iraq is the last count of the
Congressional Budget Office where was
the Iraqi government you know we did
many things wrong we set up this
facility it became a radicalization
center but as I just told you
the Iraqi prisons were sites of endemic
rape
torture and other human rights abuses if
Iraqi citizens were that lucky they
oftentimes we they were just being shot
on the streets by the Iraqi security
services and demolitions am i right
no I don't agree on that Ali I'm sorry I
don't I die I certainly do not agree on
that now the people in the Iraqi prisons
at least there are they can take their
relatives can see them that there are
I'm not saying that Iraqi prisons were
the ideal prisons okay there were there
were some inhumane things committed in
in these prisons true because we are in
a state of war continuous state of war
but I I think that book kombucha is a
real disaster and the American suffer of
this I call it chronic recurrent
short-termism
they're short-sighted they can't see
behind there knows the the it's I can
see it happening I can see people are
coming out of this Detention Center
brainwashed did you of course
did you tell them of course because
those those who live the
during I mean the Americans were there
when they did detained when they leave
that con they're going to blame
themselves again and they go and commit
another suicide bomb so the we can see
and we put a percentage of those the
number of people
if we release 100 from the Camp Bucca
there's going to be at least 15 percent
of these are going to come back and
fight us so the better and despite all
these facts and all these statistics the
American kept on releasing people from
there and not doing anything inside that
comes as long as it's preventive
measures lets them let dump them there
and what happened after that is nothing
none of our business
nothing I think just briefly on that I
think the the statistics are that 18 of
the
27 senior Isis leaders were all veterans
of Camp Bucca and I think that speaks
for itself I would just say in response
dr. Abadi we knew what was happening you
know what was happening we really did
the issue though is Iraq is in the Iraqi
people's country and the Iraqi
government's country we were a foreign
force and a foreign power that really
was intent on doing some good even
though it didn't result in a lot of good
but our intent was was I think
relatively pure I think we can all agree
on that
the issue is if you saw these problems
among the American system and I
wholeheartedly agree with you about the
issue of short-termism why did the Iraqi
government not try to set up better
alternative facilities to this day to
this day because because because let
NASA to this day oh my god no because we
did we were under occupation the
occupation the occupying force is in
charge of security in charge of economy
in charge of politics officially as of
the 15th of May 2003 we were totally we
had a sovereignty back zero on June 28
2004 ambassador Bremer Todd allowi
no no National Security Advisor this is
true this is sovereignty but from then
onward until the end of 2011 the
Americans were there with 120 30 40
thousand soldiers after we talked with
we they're there they're everywhere did
you want us to leave the earlier what we
were we were in the country and your gun
was request
highly I was of their opinion and I have
put this in writing to the prime
minister to solder him then and to
Sistani copy I thought and I said the
Americans have changed their mind
they're not working with the majority
Iraqis they are working there there now
consolidating the the western provinces
their presence there and I think they
should have left by the end of 2007 we
would have been in a much better
position than I can tell you honestly
that and this is in writing this is not
claiming I in handwriting that if I may
say so so why were you part of the
software negotiating team which I was
also a part of it I was representing my
country and I was representing my prime
minister so so you are I was of the
opinion that the this the Americans
should have then according to the sofa
and I told the Prime Minister that and
this is the first time I mentioned it I
told the Prime Minister then that I can
get the American out within one year the
sofa can last only one year and believe
them and by the end of 2009 they could
have left as well the funny thing is
even longer the American stage in the
country the more mistakes after mistakes
after mistakes they are committed in
security and economy and in politics
[Music]
while the insurgency regrouped under the
glare of Camp Bucca across the border in
Syria the fate of two nations was being
forged away from prying eyes there were
indications that there were secret
meetings between the Assad regime former
Iraqi by the officers and then
individuals jihadis who would one day
rise to two head ISIL
their interest was in in destabilizing
the the American occupation keeping the
American soft guard across the border at
that point the Assad regime wasn't sure
of what the American intentions were
visibly Syria whether Syria was next in
their way
there were lots of rumors to that effect
I went and met President Bashar Assad
twice and presented him with material
evidence documents satellite pictures
confession all sort of evidence that his
security forces were involved in active
and transporting a jihadist from Sierra
and also there were training camps with
names and locations he was in total
denial of that I remember telling him
that this will in no time it will
backfire on Syria President Bashar
al-assad's alliance with jihadists was
all about short-term security at a time
of heightened paranoia for the jihadists
to Assad and the Baathists were simply a
means to an end but whatever the
motivation the effect was very clear
that these senior leaders of the Islamic
state group are sitting down with senior
Baathists in particular a guy who who
became essential to the to the latest
incarnation of Isis a guy who called
Hajji Bakr I interrogated one of the
obvious ISIL guys now his head
all our meetings we have a guy who hides
his face clean shaved is not the Emir
he's the deputy Emir but no decision is
made without consulting him nobody knew
much about him he was he was so
effective in remaining low-profile that
there was there was there was barely a
photograph of him there was a barely an
understanding of what what role he was
playing what he was doing or where he
was he doesn't take part in the prayer
he doesn't practice Islam and he has his
jargon there's not the jihadi jargon as
the Baathist pan Arab East Arab
nationalist jargon he knew a lot about
how to create a state system and
certainly how to create institutions
which would serve that system the
alliance between Baathists and Salafists
conspired in secret while insurgents
plotted in prison a troubling perfect
storm had been brewing since the US
invasion of Iraq but by 2009 the worst
of the turbulence had supposedly been
weathered the Sunni insurgency was
considered beaten the newly-created
his la McStay t'v Iraq was drawing
breath the Arab world was on the cusp of
an historic upheaval
[Music]
ISIL is the product of genocide in Syria
the Iraqi army was really a machine for
making money you will find no safe haven
they already had British and American
special forces in Syria training rebel
groups the amount of oil that ISIL were
able to sell was up upwards of around
three to four million dollars per day if
it looks like it there is the 4x like a
terrorist if it walks like a terrorist
it's a terrorist